In honor of the veterans who have served our country, both past and present, First National Bank, a Franklin Family Community Bank, proudly sponsors Veterans of the Valley.
Since 1862, First National has provided local decision-making and accessibility, as well as banking products and services to Brazos Valley citizens.
Thanks for joining us on another edition of Veterans of the Valley.
He says he's from Evansville, Indiana originally.
He notes he was actually born in Danville, Illinois because that's where the closest hospital was.
He played baseball and football in high school and he was pretty good at it.
He lettered for three years.
He was president of the student council.
He married his high school sweetheart, Jay, and they are still together today after 45 glorious years.
He's a veteran of the Vietnam War.
He flew 213 total combat missions, 113 as a forward air controller.
We'll let him tell you about that.
Veterans of the Valley welcomes former U.S.
Air Force Captain Jerry Congleton to today's show.
Jerry, thanks for being here.
Thank you for having me.
Let's pick it up right.
Basically, you got commissioned right out of school.
Pick it up from there and tell us what happened.
I got an industrial engineering degree from University of Evansville in 1967.
And the day I graduated, I was commissioned in the Air Force out of ROTC.
I was a volunteer.
I was married with two children.
There was no way that I would have been drafted with two children.
But my grandfather had served in World War I, my father in World War II.
and I thought it was my turn, and I believed in the mission for Vietnam and fighting communism.
So you just felt it was your turn and your duty to go?
Absolutely.
Okay.
Go ahead and tell us, where did you end up starting out at?
Well, they sent me to Vance Air Force Base.
We thought we'd see the world, and they sent us to Vance Air Force Base in Enid, Oklahoma, which is really not seeing the world much from there.
It's like God took a fly swatter and smacked the earth
and everything was a section line.
And so we used to watch the tornadoes go by when we weren't flying.
After Enid, Oklahoma, graduated from pilot training in 1968 in May, we went to, I was selected then for F4s and went to training in Davis-Monthan for radar training.
After that, we went to sea survival school where they practiced dropping us out of an LST and floating down to the water and sitting in a raft for an hour to give us that experience.
All I know for sure is that I didn't want to eject.
And if I was going to eject, I would prefer to do that over water as opposed to over land.
We went then to...
to a Vietnam POW training camp where they would simulate the tactics that the Vietnamese would use on you if you had been captured.
That was quite an experience in itself.
The basic thing that I learned out of that was that I did not want to be captured.
The bottom line is you don't want to be captured.
I do not want to be captured.
because the mind games that they could play with you in just 72 hours were unbelievable to me, and I knew that that, again, was not one of the things that I wanted to do.
So before I'd ever check out of an F4, it was going to be absolutely last resort because of the situation.
They also offered me at that time an opportunity to go to Winter Survival, and I didn't think that really made any sense for me to go Winter Survival, but they gave us an alternative, which was to learn
a special code that in case we did get shot down, we could write messages within our messages if the Red Cross was allowed to give any letters to our family.
So I elected to do that, which I don't remember how to do anymore anyway, so it really wouldn't have been much value.
Following that, I went to the Philippines and went through jungle survival.
I remember
you're as a young person you know i'll be 25 years old they were telling us as we got off the airplane there and gave us a briefing about uh being at clark air force base and these are all the places that you shouldn't go because it would be dangerous and we were writing them down as fast as we possibly could so that we could go we thanked them then for telling us all about these places because
When you're in that mode of going to war and you don't really know what it's all about, you're trying to live life to its fullest.
Right.
And so you don't want to leave anything out.
You pretty much feel indestructible at that point, more or less.
Exactly.
Or you do feel destructible and you want to make sure you live life before you lose your life, possibly.
We went to jungle survival, and in the jungle survival training, that was an interesting process in itself.
The Negrito natives, there's 5,000 of them.
They're pygmies.
They live up in the mountains in the northern Philippines, still use blowguns, still use bow and arrow.
The tallest male would be about the size of my 12-year-old son.
They have two things in their organization.
They have a king and they have an executioner.
So it's an interesting organization for running the 5,000 agreed old natives there, loincloths, the whole bit.
Again, having to camp out in the jungle at night using your tent and how you could get up off the ground and that the fact that the jungle comes alive at night
and you have snakes and rats and all kinds of animals scurrying along the ground and in the trees, et cetera.
Again, it reinforced to me another reason for not ejecting.
That was the biggest thing I learned out of sea survival, POW training camp, jungle survival was,
I was going to stay with the airplane unless it was a last resort.
They were going to make it bad enough for you where you're going to stay with that aircraft and get it back or someplace a lot safer.
Exactly.
And I think that that's part of the training that they want you to have is don't get out of the airplane unless it's an absolute necessity.
Right.
And from there, I went to getting ready to get on a C-130 and go over to Da Nang.
And they pulled me out of my group of fellow pilots and said,
We want you to go to Uban, Thailand.
I didn't even know where Uban, Thailand was.
But in the military, when they tell you to do something, you just get on another airplane and you go.
And so for the viewers, Uban is at what northeast part of Thailand, upper part of Thailand?
It's the central north central on the Mekong River, not very far from the Mekong River, probably only about 22 miles away.
It sits in the middle part of Laos as the eastern border.
And so most of the war I did fight was in Laos, which was a neutral country and nobody knew we were fighting there.
But there was a hell of a war that went on in Laos.
Because that's where the trucks and the supplies came down from North Vietnam.
They were pretty much blocked at the DMZ from North and South Vietnam.
So they would go in through Laos and the Magia Pass and Bankerai Pass and then down through hundreds and hundreds of trails.
into south vietnam and cambodia and then from cambodia into south vietnam so they would just do kind of a swing in to get back into exactly the navy had them blocked on the gulf side on the ocean side and so our job was to take them out on the uh on the um lao laotian side right and so uh
Got there, went into the 25th Tech Fighter Squadron, and our primary mission there was to drop electronic trees during the daytime.
An electronic tree was just a camouflage like a rocket that you would drop off your airplane and it would go down and stick in the ground and bury itself except for the antenna.
next to a known trail.
How big was this thing?
Like a yardstick or?
Yes, about a yardstick.
Okay.
That's a good guess.
And the thing would stick in the ground, and they're also booby traps.
So if they did want to go mess with it, it probably wasn't a good idea on their part.
But we'd put that like 100 meters or less off of the trail.
And then at night, at Nkamp Phnom NKP,
They had a big theater set up with all the trails through Laos coming out of Mageea Pass and Bancari Pass, and they'd have them up there, and if a trail was active because of the sensor of either heat or vibration of the truck going next to the road or voices or whatever, it would let you know that that trail was active.
you were dropping these weapons off of a Loran system that was plus or minus, I think it was 65 feet.
So it was really very accurate.
And so you would then offset back onto the trail and you would go back at night, low level and drop your weapons along the trail, hoping to hit a truck so that you get something lit up.
So then they could come in with flares and take it out in a big time way.
So,
whole war over there from the 25th squadron standpoint and from our standpoint was fighting with one hand tied behind your back right and it was very frustrating from that standpoint because there would be 300 trucks lined up on the north vietnamese side of the border waiting to come across at night we couldn't touch them during the daytime when they come across the border at night then we could
have at them.
And that's really not giving your military an opportunity to do what they could do, which was to make the enemy not have the ability to fight.
When you have a president and the defense McNamara, if you have Johnson and McNamara and President Johnson choosing targets in his bedroom at night,
as opposed to your generals or colonels or lieutenant colonels or majors or whoever, you know that you don't have much of a chance to fight the war the way you need to fight the war to win.
But we had some arrogance about us, and the arrogance was, well, even with one hand tied behind our back, we could still beat you.
And so we would send C-130s out at night with guns.
We'd have our 25th squadron there dropping
weapons along the trails.
We'd have the night owls dropping flares at Mageea Pass and Bankerai Pass to catch trucks on the road under the flares.
Even with all that, the interdiction was somewhat successful, but not successful enough to win the war.
And that was a very frustrating thing about that.
Sometimes we would turn off our responder
and go low level just into North Vietnam, not legally, according to the rules, but just to see how many trucks they were.
And that's the reason why I can verify that there were 300 trucks.
We counted them.
Right.
So that was... You could see them, you just couldn't touch them.
Couldn't touch them.
Couldn't blow up their bridges, couldn't blow up their dams, flood the country.
So it was a very politicized, political type of war.
trying to fight the war in the media instead of trying to fight the war the way they fought the war in World War II or World War I, which was to win the war.
And that was frustrating.
It was still a war against communism.
People forget that we were fighting communists, that we end up stopping communism in Southeast Asia.
There was not any more after Vietnam.
No more countries were taken over by communism.
Um, we lost 58,000 soldiers.
They lost 2 million people.
They lost 20% of their population.
So that to me is, yeah, we're the losers.
In my view, we did not lose.
We stopped communism and that's what we were supposed to do.
And that's the reason I was there.
People forget that we had a Cuban missile crisis in the early sixties that, uh,
We stopped communism from coming to Cuba from the standpoint of having missiles there only 90 miles from our shore.
We stopped Che Guevara in Africa.
We stopped Che Guevara in South America.
So to me, it was all about fighting communism.
And also, the North Vietnamese and the Viet Cong are terrorists, in my view.
They were the worst terrorists, much worse than what you see today in Iraq and Afghanistan and Al-Qaeda.
I was not, there was no doubt in my mind who the enemy was and that they were the worst.
Much like the Khmer Rouge and Cambodia.
Absolutely.
What they did to their people is unbelievable and it gets no press whatsoever.
And that was frustrating.
You spoke, you flew the F-4s, was that the D or E model?
I flew the C's, D's, and E's.
But in Vietnam, it was primarily D's.
The D model?
And the D had the external gun and had rocket pods or weapons.
It could carry 2,200, 500-pound bombs.
It could carry missiles.
So it had a multiple role.
It had the bombing role.
It had air-to-air role, and it had air-to-ground role.
It was pretty much the workhorse of the war at that time.
It was, and it was the best plane that we had at that particular time.
58,000 pounds, it was a huge plane, lots of power, put out a lot of black smoke, made a lot of noise, but it was the best we had, and it served us well.
we've got some pictures let's go to those and you can maybe tell us a little bit about the f4 because i think we've got a few shots of you standing with i guess that would be your your bird that you're with actually this is the t-38 from pilot training this is the last jet i flew in pilot training they still use those today don't they still use them today and my grandkids are amazed that they still have an airplane that
They're using the day that I flew those years ago.
They expect to be a prop plan or something with two wings.
Exactly, yeah.
And they're actually amazed that we actually had colored pictures, colored photos in those days.
That's a picture of me standing in my hut at the VOQ or BOQ for our officers' quarters.
Picture of elephants in the background that had a lot of kind of tapestry in...
Thailand and you see from that picture I'm a slim young man as compared to today.
It reminds me of a story that my wife did with me and I got all excited about Iraq and Afghanistan and I thought that I could still do it and I started driving faster and taking corners faster and my wife told me, I told her this rush I was getting and
my wife has a way of humbling me and bringing me back to earth.
And she said, why don't you go in the closet and put your flight suit on if you can still get it on, which I couldn't, and run around the backyard and I'll shoot at you with a pistol.
So it kind of let me know that
my day had come and gone, and so that's the way that turned out.
Okay, okay.
What's this picture of?
That's a picture of me standing next to the F4, and the big intake behind, that's the ladder that you climb up into the F4.
That's with all my gear on, my survival kit, my weapon, 38, your emergency radios.
You usually have two of those.
You usually had some water bottles, your survival knives,
the ability to take care of yourself if you do get on the ground.
Right.
And so that's a picture of the group of forward air controllers called the Wolf FACS, FACS standing for forward air controller.
I was in the Wolf Pack, which is the 8th Attack Fighter Wing, and these are seven crews that served as the Wolf FACS.
We were the FACS.
forward air controllers for the 8th Tech Fighter Wing or anybody that was sent into Central Laos.
We controlled Central Laos.
Nothing was put in bomb-wise into Central Laos during the day that we did not direct.
That you guys didn't know about.
We directed it.
We marked the target.
Our airplane, as you can see there, it has missiles on it.
It has the center-mounted gun.
it has a rocket pod and the rocket pod was there to shoot individual rockets with a white smoke because they make a white smoke and you would shoot that at the target that would mark the target for the four airplanes that were above you at 10 12 000 feet once they see the target then they would roll in we would stay around 1200 1500 feet to 2500 feet so as not to get
into gunfire from AK-47s above that, but below what 23 millimeter and 37 millimeter guns could do.
That was kind of our, that was our hopefully safe zone.
Okay.
As safe as it could get.
Exactly.
And we would stay in that area around the target and all through Central Laos.
And you memorize Central Laos like the back of your hand.
I'm at the peanut karst.
I'm at the alligator head.
Everything had a name.
If you could see a piece of ground, you knew where you were and you know that when you went down, you could turn left or right and not hit a karst.
You just, you became so familiar with it because you spent three and a half hours a day on your mission.
That seven crews flew three to four missions a day.
One would be off.
administratively or a rest and recuperation or whatever.
So my missions in the 25th squadron were that ranged from 40 minutes to an hour and 20 minutes.
My missions with a forward air controller were three and a half hours with four or five refuelings because we're burning up a lot of fuel when we're down low to the ground, have it at 500 knots, moving back and forth, jinking the airplane.
So you burn up a lot of fuel and that's that three, three to six G's.
And like if my trunk weighs a hundred pounds, six G's means that when I was pulled six G's, my trunk weighed 600 pounds.
That's the reason my back got into a heavy load.
That's a heavy load more than my back wanted.
Right.
Uh, this is a picture of the champagne flight.
Uh, my last mission, 213 combat missions.
Um, and, uh, also this is, uh,
This is actually the colonel's girlfriend.
Give me a kiss.
He's sitting there.
He's standing there on the left hand side.
And Jay knew all about this.
Jay knew all about this.
And she was she would be happy with this from the standpoint that she knew I was coming home.
Right.
And so in 10 and a half months, I flew this 213 missions, 113 of those with as a forward air controller.
I got over 500 hours of combat time.
Tell us what each of these medals are.
Well, the blue and white one there is the Distinguished Flying Cross.
And the one on the right is the Vietnam medal.
That's the one with the yellow with the three red stripes.
And the one with the blue and the orange, that is the...
air metal, and that's the one that I have 17 air metals.
We call them 16 oak leaf clusters, the air metals.
Mostly, people would get an air metal for flying 25 missions, but we were getting them for every seven missions because of the length of our mission and the high visibility.
We lost an airplane out of those seven crews.
We lost an airplane every month.
we lost a crew every other month.
And so it had a lot more visibility in terms of risk.
And the hardest phone call I ever had to make was when I came back from R&R back in the States and told my wife that I was joining WFAC.
After I told her how crazy they were in the mission and I would never do that, the day I got back they asked me to join and I couldn't refuse.
I just don't think I could ever live with myself from the standpoint of if I let someone else take that job when they wanted me and they thought I was one of the better ones.
If something happened to that individual, I don't think I could have lived with myself, so I had to step up.
Right.
Now, this picture here, I believe, you've left Nam now, and this is?
This is in our squadron in Bitburg, Germany.
I was in Germany for three and a half years.
I'm an aircraft commander.
That is Mike Smith, a fellow fighter pilot.
He served two tours in Vietnam, one in the Goonie Bird and then the other as an F-4 pilot.
And we're going to Cambrai, France for the NATO Tiger meet.
All the squadrons, all the Tiger squadrons in NATO for the fighter squadrons get together once a year.
This is a meet in Cambrai, France, where Mike and I were representing the United States.
This is a lady.
Is that the plane right there that you put?
Yes, that's the F-4.
And you can see it's a pretty...
Pretty big airplane and quite a workhorse, as you said.
So the NATO Tigers get together and it is a happening.
All the fighter pilots trying to outdo the other fighter pilots, trying to outfly them and outdrink them and whatever.
And so it's a wild session.
They hold their own little top gun.
Exactly.
And we've got to talk about this picture.
This is my wife when we were on arrest and recuperation in Hawaii.
You can tell she was my little blonde hippie at that time.
And 45 years we've been together with three children and six grandchildren, the seventh on the way and two step-grandchildren.
And she had me laughing when I met her when she was 15, and she still has me laughing today.
That's great.
You can't get any better than that.
Yes, sir.
What was the difference between flying, obviously, combat in Vietnam?
And we just have a couple of minutes left.
But then you went to Germany.
So it had to be a big, as far as a psychological thing, of going from that kind of environment to the flying in Germany for the European...
When I first arrived there, I reported to duty in my camouflage flight suit and my jungle flight boots and the major personnel officer there told me that I needed to get into a green bag because I might scare the population.
It was very difficult for me to be fighting communism in Vietnam and then go to Italy and be trained
And yet there'd be, Communists was a major party in Italy, and you see the hammer and sickle on banners.
And I'm very fortunate I didn't get in trouble making that transition.
A little bit of luck, I stayed out of trouble.
All right, good.
Anything else?
We've just got maybe about one minute left.
I just might want to describe one mission to you from the standpoint that would give you an idea of what we did.
We had the...
37 millimeter sight.
It had five positions, brand new picture.
Not often did you get a brand new picture because the jungle grew very quickly.
We rolled in on it, put our mark in, asked the lead if they had it.
No response, no response.
And then he asked us, and when we went down, they were shooting above and below the wings with tracers.
And I just, you know, I,
During the daytime, that was very unusual that you had them above and below the wings on both sides of the airplane.
So that gave me a pretty good pucker factor.
And then second, we went down.
He asked us to go down again because the navigator dropped the picture.
Anyway, went back down again, same thing, dropped the weapon, 300 yards, all clean and gone.
And that's basically what you got your distinguished flying crossbow, correct?
That's correct.
Jerry, we're out of time.
Thank you very much for being here today, and thank you for sharing your story with us.
And thank you, Kyle, and thanks, Tom, and thanks for this program, KMU, because this is something that didn't happen to me 37 years ago.
To get a chance to do this today is wonderful.
And it's long overdue.
You know, he's as strong as his convictions today as he was back in 1967 when he volunteered to go to Vietnam.
He was the consummate Air Force pilot.
He knew his job, and he did it very well.
So well, in fact, he was awarded Distinguished Flying Cross and 17 Air Medals, as you heard.
Veterans of the Valley salutes Jerry Congleton and all veterans of our armed forces.
If you happen to see an individual in uniform around town, take just a minute to say thank you for what they do and the commitment they have made of their own free will to serve this country.
For the entire KMUHD crew and Tom Turbyville, I'm Kyle Netterville.
So long for now until the next installment of Veterans of the Valley.
.